AI #1630: Document recent decisions by the TF-RM on naming and numbering (#1650)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: guidelines/writing-requirements-model-guidelines.md

Reviewer: This is not in scope for the PR as proposed, but I feel that you should go back to the top of the document and take a stab at rewriting it.  Make explicit use of the term `Requirements Model`.  And when you say "rules", make it clear that you're describing it in the scope of the Requirements Model.  I could see someone reading this and thinking you're talking about normative requirements in the spec.

# Guidelines for writing model rules

As the FOCUS working group moves to introduce a formal rule definition structure the requirement for FOCUS members to understand how to read and write rules will increase. This guide is here to assist those who are starting their journey in writing rules for FOCUS.

The `specification/requirements_model` folder contains modular model components and a Python-based build process that assembles them into a validated `model-<version>.json` file using a corresponding JSON Schema (`model_schema.json`).

This sets the scope of the model requirement.

#### FOCUS Core Entities

The following architectural components define the core entities in FOCUS that shape the structure and flow of billing data.

<img width="491" height="491" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a30d828e-d2af-4185-984c-475998466437"/>

- **Dataset, Column, Attribute, Metadata** are the **core structural entities** where model requirements are directly assigned.

##### FOCUS Entity Reference Table

| Entity             | Description                                         | Applies To                                | Example RM Function                                                                                             |
|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------| ----------------------------------------- |-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `Dataset`          | Whole billing dataset                               | Structural presence, versioning, coverage | Dataset MUST include all columns required by the declared FOCUS version                                         |

> | `Row`              | Individual line item in dataset                     | Logic conditions, nullability, alignment  | Rows with `ChargeCategory = Purchase` MUST contain a `SkuId`                                                    |

Author: ```suggestion
```

| ModelDatasets | List of datasets defined by FOCUS and the related top level model rules associated with the dataset |
| ModelRules | Individual model rule definitions that are linked together by requirements and dependencies to form the full model ruleset |

## Steps to create model rules for FOCUS entities

An Action Item (AI) ticket should be opened to track the progress of implementing the model rules for an existing check.

### Stage 1

The first stage of conversion of rules from the normative text to model rules is for a table to be generated with the format as follows:

- `ModelRuleId` - Formal identifier for this model rule entry
- `Function` - The type of rule to be defined (Valid types: `Composite`, `Presence`, `Type`, `Format`, `Validation`)
- `Reference` - The Column/Attribute Id this rule applies to

> - `EntityType` - The type of entity this rule applies to (Valid types: `Dataset`, `Column`, `Attribute`, `Object`, `Metadata`)

Reviewer: We're not supporting Metadata yet.  So either strike it here, or (much harder) add it to the RM.

```suggestion
- `EntityType` - The type of entity this rule applies to (Valid types: `Dataset`, `Column`, `Attribute`, `Object`)
```

- `EntityName` - The human-readable name of the entity this rule applies to
- `EntityId` - The unique identifier of the entity this rule applies to
- `Notes` - Free form notes (short) included in the model rule document
- `ModelVersionIntroduced` - Requirement Model Version this rule was added to the Model Rules
- `Status` - Status of the rule (Valid values: Active, Deprecated, Removed)

> - `ModelVersionRemoved` - Requirement Model Version this rule was removed from the Model Rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ModelVersionIntroduced` - Requirements Model Version this rule was added to the Model Rules
- `Status` - Status of the rule (Valid values: Active, Deprecated, Removed)
- `ModelVersionRemoved` - Requirements Model Version this rule was removed from the Model Rules
```

- `ApplicabilityCriteria` - Specific criteria that must be true of the data generator for this rule to apply to the dataset
- `Type` - Identifier if this is a Static or Dynamic rule, with Static rules being possible to assess model without external information being required
- `Order` - The order in which this rule should be processed or displayed
- `DatasetType` - The dataset type this rule applies to (e.g. "CAU" for Cost and Usage, "CCT" for Contract Commitment)

> - `DatasetId` - The identifier of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Column and Dataset entity types, e.g. "CostAndUsage" for Cost and Usage, "ContractCommitment" for Contract Commitment)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DatasetId` - The identifier of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Dataset, Column, and Object entity types, e.g. "CostAndUsage" for Cost and Usage, "ContractCommitment" for Contract Commitment)
```

- `DatasetName` - The human-readable name of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Column and Dataset entity types, e.g. "Cost and Usage" for Cost and Usage)

> - `ValidationCriteria` - The detailed criteria that defines how this rule is to be validated,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ValidationCriteria` - The detailed criteria that defines how this rule is to be validated
```

  - `MustSatisfy` - The normative text that this rule defines

>   - `Keyword` - The Normative keyword that applies to this rule (Allowed Values: `MUST`, `RECOMMENDED`, `SHOULD`, `MAY`, `OPTIONAL`)

Reviewer: We aren't using RECOMMENDED anymore, and we've never used OPTIONAL.  Also feels like we should specify MUST NOT and SHOULD NOT.

(Or did we want to retain RECOMMENDED, given that it's still in use in the 1.3 model, but won't be going forward...?)

```suggestion
  - `Keyword` - The Normative keyword that applies to this rule (Allowed Values: `MUST`, `MUST NOT`, `SHOULD`, `SHOULD NOT`, `MAY`)
```

  - `Requirement` - The definition of what is required for model
  - `Condition` - The definition of conditions under which this rule applies

#### Stage 1: Rule-Based Extraction of Normative Requirements

Stage 1 converts normative requirements from the FOCUS specification into structured, machine-readable JSON using the property definitions below. Apply the extraction rules deterministically to ensure each normative statement is consistently identified, classified, and represented without inference or reinterpretation. The resulting JSON must strictly conform to the defined structure, enabling consistency across releases and supporting automation, validation, and analysis workflows.

#### High-Level Description of the Model Rule Properties

#### 1. Target Entity – Determine the entity

> Identify the target for the rule: **Dataset**, **Column**, **Attribute** property, **Metadata**, **Object**etc. This sets the scope of the model requirement.

Reviewer: Small typo.  But further, could we make this a complete list and eliminate the etc?  It's these five, and only these five, yes?

```suggestion
Identify the target for the rule: **Dataset**, **Column**, **Attribute**, **Metadata**, or **Object**. This sets the scope of the model requirement.
```

Author: Fixed

| ModelDatasets | List of datasets defined by FOCUS and the related top level model rules associated with the dataset |
| ModelRules | Individual model rule definitions that are linked together by requirements and dependencies to form the full model ruleset |

## Steps to create model rules for FOCUS entities

An Action Item (AI) ticket should be opened to track the progress of implementing the model rules for an existing check.

### Stage 1

The first stage of conversion of rules from the normative text to model rules is for a table to be generated with the format as follows:

- `ModelRuleId` - Formal identifier for this model rule entry

> - `Function` - The type of rule to be defined (Valid types: `Composite`, `Presence`, `Type`, `Format`, `Validation`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Function` - The type of rule to be defined (Valid types: `Composite`, `Presence`, `Type`, `Format`, `Validation`, `Nullability`, `Ambiguous`)
```

Author: ```suggestion
- `Function` - The type of rule to be defined (Valid types: `Composite`, `Presence`, `Type`, `Format`, `Validation`, `Nullability`)
```

- `EntityName` - The human-readable name of the entity this rule applies to
- `EntityId` - The unique identifier of the entity this rule applies to
- `Notes` - Free form notes (short) included in the model rule document
- `ModelVersionIntroduced` - Requirements Model Version this rule was added to the Model Rules
- `Status` - Status of the rule (Valid values: Active, Deprecated, Removed)
- `ModelVersionRemoved` - Requirements Model Version this rule was removed from the Model Rules
- `ApplicabilityCriteria` - Specific criteria that must be true of the data generator for this rule to apply to the dataset
- `Type` - Identifier if this is a Static or Dynamic rule, with Static rules being possible to assess model without external information being required
- `Order` - The order in which this rule should be processed or displayed
- `DatasetType` - The dataset type this rule applies to (e.g. "CAU" for Cost and Usage, "CCT" for Contract Commitment)
- `DatasetId` - The identifier of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Dataset, Column, and Object entity types, e.g. "CostAndUsage" for Cost and Usage, "ContractCommitment" for Contract Commitment)

> - `DatasetName` - The human-readable name of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Column and Dataset entity types, e.g. "Cost and Usage" for Cost and Usage)

Reviewer: To match `DatasetId` immediately above.

```suggestion
- `DatasetName` - The human-readable name of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Dataset, Column, and Object entity types, e.g. "Cost and Usage" for Cost and Usage)
```

- `ValidationCriteria` - The detailed criteria that defines how this rule is to be validated
  - `MustSatisfy` - The normative text that this rule defines
  - `Keyword` - The Normative keyword that applies to this rule (Allowed Values: `MUST`, `MUST NOT`, `SHOULD`, `SHOULD NOT`, `MAY`)
  - `Requirement` - The definition of what is required for model

>   - `Condition` - The definition of conditions under which this rule applies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `Condition` - The definition of conditions under which this rule applies
  - `Dependencies` - A list of prerequisite rules that must be evaluated before this rule, ordered by sequence
```

#### Stage 1: Rule-Based Extraction of Normative Requirements

Stage 1 converts normative requirements from the FOCUS specification into structured, machine-readable JSON using the property definitions below. Apply the extraction rules deterministically to ensure each normative statement is consistently identified, classified, and represented without inference or reinterpretation. The resulting JSON must strictly conform to the defined structure, enabling consistency across releases and supporting automation, validation, and analysis workflows.

#### High-Level Description of the Model Rule Properties

#### 1. Target Entity – Determine the entity

Identify the target for the rule:

- **Attribute**
- **Dataset**
- **Column**
- **Object**

This sets the scope of the model requirement.

#### FOCUS Core Entities

The following architectural components define the core entities in FOCUS that shape the structure and flow of billing data.

<img width="491" height="491" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a30d828e-d2af-4185-984c-475998466437"/>

> - **Dataset, Column, Attribute, Metadata** are the **core structural entities** where model requirements are directly assigned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Dataset, Column, Object, and Attribute** are the **core structural entities** where model requirements are directly assigned.
```

##### FOCUS Entity Reference Table

| Entity             | Description                                         | Applies To                                | Example RM Function                                                                                             |
|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------| ----------------------------------------- |-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `Dataset`          | Whole billing dataset                               | Structural presence, versioning, coverage | Dataset MUST include all columns required by the declared FOCUS version                                         |

> | `Row`              | Individual line item in dataset                     | Logic conditions, nullability, alignment  | Rows with `ChargeCategory = Purchase` MUST contain a `SkuId`                                                    |

Reviewer: I believe this "row" needs to go.  😏 

```suggestion
```

| `Column`           | Named field across rows                             | Data type, format, constraints            | Each item in `AllocatedMethodDetailsObject.Elements` MUST be an object.                                                         |
| `Object`           | JSONObject content of a column                      | Data type, format, constraints            | Column `BillingPeriodStart` MUST be of type `DateTime`                                                          |
| `Attribute`        | Shared formatting/logic constraint                  | Formatting consistency across columns     | All `String` columns MUST conform to `StringHandling` requirements                                              |

#### 2. RMID – Apply RMID Naming Rules

Construct a unique identifier for the rule using the format:  
`{{ColumnID}}-{{EntityType}}-{{NNN}}-{{Level}}`

This ensures traceability, uniqueness, and clarity.

- Use the format: `DatasetType-ColumnID-EntityType-NNN-Level`

> - `DatasetType`: Short identifier for the dataset (e.g., `CAU`, `CC`, `META`)

Author: ```suggestion
- `DatasetType`: Short identifier for the dataset (e.g., `CAU`, `CCT`)
```

The first stage of conversion of rules from the normative text to model rules is for a table to be generated with the format as follows:

> - `ModelRuleId` - Is the formal Id given to this entry in the model rules (See: [CR Expression Format](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/blob/1121-ai-align-on-approach-for-scrs/specification/requirements_model/README.md#-cr-expression-format))

Reviewer: Please scrub any presence of "CR" to "RM".

- `Notes` - Free form notes (short) included in the model rule document
- `ModelVersionIntroduced` - Requirement Model Version this rule was added to the Model Rules (See: [Model Versioning](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/blob/1121-ai-align-on-approach-for-scrs/specification/requirements_model/README.md#versioning))
- `Status` - Status of the rule (Valid values: Active, Deprecated, Removed)
- `ModelVersionRemoved` - Requirement Model Version this rule was removed from the Model Rules
- `ApplicabilityCriteria` - Specific criteria that must be true of the data generator for this rule to apply to the dataset
- `Type` - Identifier if this is a Static or Dynamic rule, with Static rules being possible to assess model without external information being required
- `Order` - The order in which this rule should be processed or displayed
- `DatasetType` - The dataset type this rule applies to (e.g. "CAU" for Cost and Usage, "CCT" for Contract Commitment)
- `DatasetId` - The identifier of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Column and Dataset entity types, e.g. "CostAndUsage" for Cost and Usage, "ContractCommitment" for Contract Commitment)

> - `DatasetName` - The human-readable name of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Column and Dataset entity types, e.g. "Cost and Usage" for Cost and Usage,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `DatasetName` - The human-readable name of the dataset this rule belongs to (Required for Column and Dataset entity types, e.g. "Cost and Usage" for Cost and Usage)
```

This stage intentionally avoids diagrammatic representations, as the extraction logic is entirely driven by the prescribed rules and constraints. The focus is on accuracy, repeatability, and structural alignment with the defined JSON model, ensuring that Stage 1 produces a faithful and complete representation of the normative requirements as written in the FOCUS specification.

#### High-Level Description of the Model Rule Properties

#### 1. Target Entity – Determine the entity

Identify the target for the rule: **Dataset**, **Column**, **Attribute** property, **Metadata**, **Object**etc. This sets the scope of the model requirement.

#### FOCUS Core Entities

The following architectural components define the core entities in FOCUS that shape the structure and flow of billing data.

<img width="491" height="491" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a30d828e-d2af-4185-984c-475998466437"/>

- **Dataset, Column, Attribute, Metadata** are the **core structural entities** where model requirements are directly assigned.

##### FOCUS Entity Reference Table

> | Entity             | Description                                         | Applies To                                | Example CR Function                                                                                             |

Reviewer: Please scrub any use of "CR" to "RM".

|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------| ----------------------------------------- |-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `Dataset`          | Whole billing dataset                               | Structural presence, versioning, coverage | Dataset MUST include all columns required by the declared FOCUS version                                         |
| `Column`           | Named field across rows                             | Data type, format, constraints            | Column `BillingPeriodStart` MUST be of type `DateTime`                                                          |
| `Attribute`        | Shared formatting/logic constraint                  | Formatting consistency across columns     | All `String` columns MUST conform to `StringHandling` requirements                                              |
| `Metadata`         | Schema-level dataset descriptors                    | Schema versioning, declaration            | Metadata MUST declare `focus_version` as a valid semantic version string (e.g., "1.2.0")                        |

> | `Object`           | TBD                                                 | TBD                                       | TBD                                                                                                             |

Reviewer: Please replace `TBD` with content.

Reviewer 2: It also looks like it might be a new or changed concept replacing something else. Should this be notated earlier on in the file, within the repository for folks expecting the former?

Reviewer: Looks good now.  Resolving!

The following architectural components define the core entities in FOCUS that shape the structure and flow of billing data.

> ```mermaid

Reviewer 3: Suggestion: Add a relationship between Dataset and Attribute.

Reviewer: @jpradocueva Please address this with a commit.

**Example**  
A rule states: "`ListUnitPrice` MUST conform to `NumericFormat`." (in Cost and Usage dataset)
→ `RMID = CAU-ListUnitPrice-C-003-M`

#### Multi-Dataset Entity Structure and Naming

The FOCUS specification supports multiple datasets, each with their own requirements. The following decisions have been made regarding entity structure and naming:

##### Dataset-Specific Requirement Entities

Each dataset will reference their own set of Requirement Entities. A single requirement item should not be referenced by multiple datasets - they should have their own entry. This ensures:

- Clear separation of concerns between datasets
- Independent evolution of dataset requirements
- Simplified validation and testing per dataset
- Reduced complexity in rule dependencies

##### Dataset-Namespaced Naming Convention

Column entities are now namespaced by the dataset they belong to. The RMID format has been updated to:

`DatasetType-ColumnID-EntityType-NNN-Level`

Where:

- `DatasetType`: Short identifier for the dataset (e.g., `CAU` for Cost and Usage)
- `ColumnID`: The column identifier in UpperCamelCase
- `EntityType`, `NNN`, `Level`: Same as previously defined

> The `NNN` numbering is only unique within each dataset namespace. For example, `CAU-ListPrice-C-000-M` and `CCT-ListPrice-C-000-M` can both exist independently - the `000` is reused and only needs to be unique within that specific dataset abbreviation.

Reviewer: No such column `ListPrice`.

```suggestion
The `NNN` numbering is only unique within each dataset namespace. For example, `CAU-ListUnitPrice-C-000-M` and `CCT-ListUnitPrice-C-000-M` can both exist independently - the `000` is reused and only needs to be unique within that specific dataset abbreviation.
```

- Clear separation of concerns between datasets
- Independent evolution of dataset requirements
- Simplified validation and testing per dataset
- Reduced complexity in rule dependencies

##### Dataset-Namespaced Naming Convention

Column entities are now namespaced by the dataset they belong to. The CRID format has been updated to:

`DatasetType-ColumnID-EntityType-NNN-Level`

Where:

- `DatasetType`: Short identifier for the dataset (e.g., `CAU` for Cost and Usage)
- `ColumnID`: The column identifier in UpperCamelCase
- `EntityType`, `NNN`, `Level`: Same as previously defined

The `NNN` numbering is only unique within each dataset namespace. For example, `CAU-ListPrice-C-000-M` and `CC-ListPrice-C-000-M` can both exist independently - the `000` is reused and only needs to be unique within that specific dataset abbreviation.

##### Examples

- Cost and Usage dataset: `CAU-BillingAccountName-C-000-M`
- Contract Commitment dataset: `CC-CommitmentDiscountId-C-001-M`

##### Dataset Abbreviations

| Dataset | Abbreviation | Description |
|---------|--------------|-------------|
| Cost and Usage | CAU | Primary billing data with usage and cost information |

> | Contract Commitment | CCT | Commitment discount and reservation data |

Reviewer 2: Here, CCT is used for Contract Commitment. This is the same for earlier in the file, "Line 40". Should this abbreviation align with the CRIDs in lines 91, 137, 141, and 142?

Author: Corrected to CCT

This namespacing approach prevents naming conflicts between datasets and provides clear traceability of which dataset a requirement belongs to.

#### 3. Function – Classify the rule type

Categorize the type of logic the rule enforces. This helps determine how it should be validated.

- Use `Presence` for rules requiring the column’s inclusion in the dataset.

> - Use `DataType` to enforce primitive types like `Decimal`, `String`, `Boolean`.

Reviewer: Should this be `Type` instead of `DataType`...?

Author: ```suggestion
- Use `Type` to enforce primitive types like `Decimal`, `String`, `Boolean`.
```

> - Use `Format` for pattern-based constraints (e.g., `DateTimeFormat`, `UUID`, `NumericFormat`).

Reviewer: In the next line, you mention `NullabilityRules`, but it's never used in the examples.... should we strike?

Author: Updated to correct Nullability

##### Dataset-Specific Requirement Entities

Each dataset will reference their own set of Requirement Entities. A single requirement item should not be referenced by multiple datasets - they should have their own entry. This ensures:

- Clear separation of concerns between datasets
- Independent evolution of dataset requirements
- Simplified validation and testing per dataset
- Reduced complexity in rule dependencies

##### Dataset-Namespaced Naming Convention

Column entities are now namespaced by the dataset they belong to. The RMID format has been updated to:

`DatasetType-ColumnID-EntityType-NNN-Level`

Where:

- `DatasetType`: Short identifier for the dataset (e.g., `CAU` for Cost and Usage)
- `ColumnID`: The column identifier in UpperCamelCase
- `EntityType`, `NNN`, `Level`: Same as previously defined

The `NNN` numbering is only unique within each dataset namespace. For example, `CAU-ListPrice-C-000-M` and `CC-ListPrice-C-000-M` can both exist independently - the `000` is reused and only needs to be unique within that specific dataset abbreviation.

##### Examples

- Cost and Usage dataset: `CAU-BillingAccountName-C-000-M`

> - Contract Commitment dataset: `CC-CommitmentDiscountId-C-001-M`

Author: ```suggestion
The `NNN` numbering is only unique within each dataset namespace. For example, `CAU-ListPrice-C-000-M` and `CCT-ListPrice-C-000-M` can both exist independently - the `000` is reused and only needs to be unique within that specific dataset abbreviation.

##### Examples

- Cost and Usage dataset: `CAU-BillingAccountName-C-000-M`
- Contract Commitment dataset: `CCT-CommitmentDiscountId-C-001-M`
```

##### Dataset Abbreviations

| Dataset | Abbreviation | Description |
|---------|--------------|-------------|
| Cost and Usage | CAU | Primary billing data with usage and cost information |
| Contract Commitment | CCT | Commitment discount and reservation data |

This namespacing approach prevents naming conflicts between datasets and provides clear traceability of which dataset a requirement belongs to.

#### 3. Function – Classify the rule type

Categorize the type of logic the rule enforces. This helps determine how it should be validated.

- Use `Presence` for rules requiring the column’s inclusion in the dataset.
- Use `Type` to enforce primitive types like `Decimal`, `String`, `Boolean`.
- Use `Format` for pattern-based constraints (e.g., `DateTimeFormat`, `UUID`, `NumericFormat`).

> - Use `NullabilityRules` to define when values must or must not be null.

Author: ```suggestion
- Use `Nullability` to define when values must or must not be null.
```

##### Dataset Abbreviations

| Dataset | Abbreviation | Description |
|---------|--------------|-------------|
| Cost and Usage | CAU | Primary billing data with usage and cost information |
| Contract Commitment | CCT | Commitment discount and reservation data |

This namespacing approach prevents naming conflicts between datasets and provides clear traceability of which dataset a requirement belongs to.

#### 3. Function – Classify the rule type

Categorize the type of logic the rule enforces. This helps determine how it should be validated.

- Use `Presence` for rules requiring the column’s inclusion in the dataset.
- Use `Type` to enforce primitive types like `Decimal`, `String`, `Boolean`.
- Use `Format` for pattern-based constraints (e.g., `DateTimeFormat`, `UUID`, `NumericFormat`).
- Use `Nullability` to define conditional nullability rules (e.g., "MUST NOT be null when condition X" or "MAY be null when condition Y").
- Use `Validation` for business logic or fixed-value conditions not covered above, including unconditional NOT NULL rules.
- Use `Composite` to group multiple RMIDs with logical expressions (`AND` / `OR` / `NOT`).

> - Use `Ambiguous` only when no clear classification is possible.

Author: ```suggestion
```

- Use `Presence` for rules requiring the column’s inclusion in the dataset.
- Use `Type` to enforce primitive types like `Decimal`, `String`, `Boolean`.
- Use `Format` for pattern-based constraints (e.g., `DateTimeFormat`, `UUID`, `NumericFormat`).
- Use `Nullability` to define conditional nullability rules (e.g., "MUST NOT be null when condition X" or "MAY be null when condition Y").
- Use `Validation` for business logic or fixed-value conditions not covered above, including unconditional NOT NULL rules.
- Use `Composite` to group multiple RMIDs with logical expressions (`AND` / `OR` / `NOT`).
- Use `Ambiguous` only when no clear classification is possible.

**Examples**  
Rule states "`BillingPeriodStart` MUST be of type `DateTime`":  
→ `Function = Type`

Rule states "`CommitmentDiscountQuantity` MUST NOT be null when `ChargeCategory` is `Purchase`":  
→ `Function = Nullability`

#### 4. Reference – Identify the reference target

Provide the identifier for the column or attribute that the rule applies to, using the PascalCase ID format.

- For columns: Use the ColumnId (e.g., `CommitmentDiscountQuantity`)

> - For attributes: Use the attribute name (e.g., `NumericFormat`, `StringHandling`)

Reviewer: How should this get populated for Dataset and Object?  I would provide a suggestion, but I'm not actually sure...

Author: ```suggestion
- For datasets: Use the DatasetId (e.g., `CostAndUsage`)
- For columns: Use the ColumnId (e.g., `CommitmentDiscountQuantity`)
- For objects: Use the ObjectId (e.g., `AllocatedMethodDetailsObject`)
- For attributes: Use the attribute name (e.g., `NumericFormat`, `StringHandling`)
```

- This field should match the ID as defined in the FOCUS specification

**Example**  
If the rule applies to the column with ID `CommitmentDiscountQuantity`:  
→ `Reference = CommitmentDiscountQuantity`

#### 5. Keyword – Extract the normative keyword

Determine the obligation level using the normative keyword from the source text, such as `MUST`, `SHOULD`, or `MAY`.

- Identify the first normative keyword present in the requirement:
  - `MUST`, `MUST NOT` → Mandatory
  - `SHOULD`, `SHOULD NOT` → Optional (unless conditional)

>   - `MAY`, `MAY NOT` → Optional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `MAY` → Optional
```

  "ColumnName": "ChargeCategory",
  "Value": "Purchase"
}
```

Conditional rule when ContractCommitmentCategory equals "Usage":
```json
"Condition": {
  "CheckFunction": "CheckValue",
  "ColumnName": "ContractCommitmentCategory",
  "Value": "Usage"
}
```

#### 8. MustSatisfy – Define how to test the rule

Copy the actual normative text from the column specification that this rule enforces, including the full sentence with the column name.

- Use the exact text from the specification document
- Include the column/entity name in the statement
- Preserve the normative keyword (`MUST`, `SHOULD`, `MAY`) as written in the specification

**Examples:**

From the specification text "`ContractCommitmentQuantity` MUST be of type Decimal.":  
→ `MustSatisfy = "ContractCommitmentQuantity MUST be of type Decimal."`

From the specification text "`ContractCommitmentQuantity` MUST conform to NumericFormat requirements.":  
→ `MustSatisfy = "ContractCommitmentQuantity MUST conform to NumericFormat requirements."`

#### 9. Requirement – Identify the check function and arguments

Define the specific validation check that implements this rule using CheckFunction objects.

> For **Composite rules**, use logical CheckFunctions to group other rules:
> - `CheckFunction: "AND"` with `Items` array containing nested requirement references
> - `CheckFunction: "OR"` with `Items` array containing nested requirement references

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For **Composite rules**, use logical CheckFunctions to group other rules:
- `CheckFunction: "AND"` with `Items` array containing nested requirement references
- `CheckFunction: "OR"` with `Items` array containing nested requirement references
- Use `CheckFunction: "CheckModelRule"` inside the `Items` array to reference other RMIDs
```

For **Atomic rules**, use specific CheckFunction types from the model:
- `ColumnPresent` - Check if a column exists in the dataset
- `CheckNotValue` - Verify a column does not contain a specific value

> - `CheckValue` - Verify a column contains a specific value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `CheckValue` - Verify a column contains a specific value
- `CheckAllowedValues` - Verify a column contains one of the allowed values
```

- Clear separation of concerns between datasets
- Independent evolution of dataset requirements
- Simplified validation and testing per dataset
- Reduced complexity in rule dependencies

##### Dataset-Namespaced Naming Convention

Column entities are now namespaced by the dataset they belong to. The CRID format has been updated to:

`DatasetAbbreviation-ColumnID-EntityType-NNN-Level`

Where:

- `DatasetAbbreviation`: Short identifier for the dataset (e.g., `CAU` for Cost and Usage)
- `ColumnID`: The column identifier in UpperCamelCase
- `EntityType`, `NNN`, `Level`: Same as previously defined

The `NNN` numbering is only unique within each dataset namespace. For example, `CAU-ListPrice-C-000-M` and `CC-ListPrice-C-000-M` can both exist independently - the `000` is reused and only needs to be unique within that specific dataset abbreviation.

##### Examples

- Cost and Usage dataset: `CAU-BillingAccountName-C-000-M`
- Contract Commitment dataset: `CC-CommitmentDiscountId-C-001-M`

##### Dataset Abbreviations

| Dataset | Abbreviation | Description |
|---------|--------------|-------------|
| Cost and Usage | CAU | Primary billing data with usage and cost information |

> | Contract Commitment | CC | Commitment discount and reservation data |

Author: CCT

Define the dataset-level or service-provider-level condition that determines when the rule is relevant for evaluation.

> - Use `"All_Rows"` when no structural gating is defined.

Reviewer: Is this right?  Seems like it should be:

```suggestion
- Use an empty list [] when no structural gating is defined.
```

- Use a logical expression (`AND()`, `OR()`, `NOT()`) to group RMIDs in composite rules.
- If the rule refers to a shared attribute rule set (e.g., `NumericFormat`, `StringHandling`), use:  
  `Requirement = NumericFormat:RM`
- Set to `"null"` for atomic rules that do not depend on other rules or attributes.
- Always define this field for composite rules, and make sure referenced RMIDs exist or appear later in the table.

**Example**  
A rule states: “The following rules MUST be enforced for `CommitmentDiscountQuantity` when it is not null…” and lists three RMs.  
→ `Requirement = AND(CommitmentDiscountQuantity-C-010-M, CommitmentDiscountQuantity-C-011-C, CommitmentDiscountQuantity-C-012-C)`

#### 10. Validation Type – Indicate static vs. dynamic

Specify whether the rule can be validated using only the dataset itself or if it depends on external systems or metadata.

- Use `static` if the rule can be enforced by examining the dataset alone:  
  Example: value types, nullability, formatting, or schema presence.
- Use `dynamic` if validation depends on:
  - External invoice records  
  - Catalog metadata  
  - Service Provider configuration or billing systems

> - For composite rules, set to `dynamic` if any child RM Item is dynamic.

Author: ```suggestion
- For composite rules, set to `Dynamic` if any child RM Item is dynamic.
```

Specify whether the rule can be validated using only the dataset itself or if it depends on external systems or metadata.

- Use `static` if the rule can be enforced by examining the dataset alone:  
  Example: value types, nullability, formatting, or schema presence.

> - Use `dynamic` if validation depends on:

Reviewer: Fix casing.  Should be Proper Case.

```suggestion
- Use `Static` if the rule can be enforced by examining the dataset alone:  
  Example: value types, nullability, formatting, or schema presence.
- Use `Dynamic` if validation depends on:
```

#### 12. Status – Set rule lifecycle status

> Indicate whether the rule is `active`, `deprecated`, or `removed` for future use.

Author: ```suggestion
Indicate whether the rule is `Active`, `Deprecated`, or `Removed` for future use.
```

- Default to `active` unless the normative text explicitly states otherwise.

> - Use `deprecated` if the rule is marked for removal or obsolescence.

Author: ```suggestion
- Default to `Active` unless the normative text explicitly states otherwise.
- Use `Deprecated` if the rule is marked for removal or obsolescence.
```

> - Use `removed` if the rule is removed from the model.

Author: ```suggestion
- Use `Removed` if the rule is removed from the model.
```

#### 12. Status – Set rule lifecycle status

> Indicate whether the rule is `Active`, `Deprecated`, or `Removed` for future use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Indicate whether the rule is `Active`, `Deprecated`, or `Removed`.
```

**Example**  
For a rule applying to a column in the Cost and Usage dataset:  
→ `DatasetId = CostAndUsage`  
→ `DatasetName = Cost and Usage`

#### 15. Dependencies – Track rule relationships

The Dependencies array lists prerequisite rules that must be evaluated before the current rule. This establishes the dependency graph and evaluation order.

**When to use Dependencies:**

- When your rule references a column that must exist (add that column's composite rule)
- When your Condition uses a column (add that column's composite rule)
- When logical evaluation order matters (e.g., type checking before format checking)
- When your rule builds on another rule's validation

**Ordering Requirements:**

- Dependencies must be listed in ascending order by their `Order` field values
- This ensures rules are evaluated in the correct sequence
- Automated tests validate dependency ordering

**Examples:**

Unconditional rule with no dependencies:
→ `Dependencies = []`

Nullability rule that depends on ChargeCategory column:
```json
"Dependencies": [
  "CAU-ChargeCategory-C-000-M"
]
```

Complex rule depending on multiple prerequisites (ordered by Order field):
```json
"Dependencies": [

>   "CAU-BilledCost-C-000-M",        // Order: 10
>   "CAU-BillingCurrency-C-000-M",   // Order: 20
>   "CAU-ChargeCategory-C-000-M"     // Order: 30

Reviewer: I know this reads alright, but comments aren't allowed in JSON.

```suggestion
  "CAU-BilledCost-C-000-M",
  "CAU-BillingCurrency-C-000-M",
  "CAU-ChargeCategory-C-000-M"
```

Author: The comments are there to highlight the order keys. Happy to remove but it's a little less informative without them.

Reviewer: I know... I just want to confirm that we're comfortable with carrying incorrect JSON forward for the purposes of human readability.  It highlights as red in GitHub, and the reader might start to question our collective respect of JSON syntax.  I'm okay with it if you are.

Author: Moved them into a table.

Rule removed in version 1.4:
→ `Status = "Removed"`, `ModelVersionRemoved = "1.4"`

**Note:** Deprecated rules should not have ModelVersionRemoved populated until they are actually removed in a future version.

### Stage 2

The second phase of conversion is to take the table created in Stage 1 and create the entries in the `specification/requirements_model` folder that adds the rules to the formal JSON structure.

#### Folder structure

Version-specific model content is organized under `specification/requirements_model/releases/X.X/` where X.X represents the model version (e.g., 1.2, 1.3). A `latest` symlink points to the most recent version.

**Version-specific structure** (`releases/X.X/`):
- `cr_details.json`: Metadata like versioning for this model version
- `applicability_criteria.json`: Feature flags controlling rule application
- `check_functions.json`: Logical validation functions and their arguments
- `model_datasets.json`: Maps datasets (e.g. FOCUS) to rule sets
- `model_rules/attributes/`: JSON files defining multiple `ModelRules` for a single attribute
- `model_rules/columns/`: JSON files defining multiple `ModelRules` for a single column

> **Build output** (top-level):

Reviewer: Line 439 above (can't suggest an edit on those lines due to GitHub annoyingly not allowing suggestions on unchanged lines) I think needs to be:

> - model_rules/datasets/<dataset_id>/columns/: JSON files defining multiple `ModelRules` for a single column within a dataset
> - model_rules/datasets/<dataset_id>/objects/: JSON files defining multiple `ModelRules` for a JSON Object within a column

- `build/model-X.X.json`: Built complete model JSON files for all versions

**Convenience paths:**
- `releases/latest/`: Symlink to the latest model version directory
- All work should be done in the appropriate version directory under `releases/X.X/`

#### Steps

- Assign the Action Item (AI) to yourself to signal that you are working on the item (See: [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/issues))
- Open a branch with the source of git feature branch for the development work in progress for your development work.
- Pull your branch to your development environment and perform all work specific to this AI in this branch.
- Navigate to the appropriate model version directory under `specification/requirements_model/releases/X.X/` (or use the `latest` symlink for current development)

> - Add a file into the relevant folder `model_rules/attributes/` or `model_rules/columns/` with name `entity-name`.json (example: availabilityzone.json)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a file into the relevant folder `model_rules/attributes/` or `model_rules/<dataset_id>/columns/` with name `entity-name`.json (example: availabilityzone.json)
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Add a file into the relevant folder `model_rules/attributes/` or `model_rules/datasets/<dataset_id>/columns/` with name `entity-name`.json (example: availabilityzone.json)
```

Reviewer: Yes... sorry.

#### 12. Status – Set rule lifecycle status

Indicate whether the rule is `Active`, `Deprecated`, or `Removed`.

- Default to `Active` unless the normative text explicitly states otherwise.
- Use `Deprecated` if the rule is marked for removal or obsolescence.
- Use `Removed` if the rule is removed from the model.

**Example**  
A rule marked in the spec as legacy:  
“This requirement will be removed in future versions.”  
→ `Status = Deprecated`

#### 13. Notes – Capture comments

Use this field to add clarifying comments, editorial notes.

- Add contextual information for better understanding of the rule.
- Leave blank only when no additional clarification is needed.

#### 14. DatasetId and DatasetName – Dataset Association

> For Column and Dataset entity types, these fields establish the relationship between the rule and its parent dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Dataset, Column, and Object entity types, these fields establish the relationship between the rule and its parent dataset.
```

1. **Rule Presentation Order**: Controls the sequence in which rules appear in generated documentation and summaries
2. **Logical Processing Sequence**: Ensures rules are evaluated in the correct order when dependencies exist
3. **Dependency Ordering**: Dependencies arrays must be ordered according to the `Order` field values of the referenced rules

### Order Field Guidelines

**Assignment Rules:**

- Use incremental values (e.g., 10, 20, 30) to allow for future insertions
- Lower values indicate higher priority/earlier processing
- Rules without an `Order` field are ignored for ordering purposes
- The `Order` field is optional but recommended for rules that need explicit sequencing

**Dependency Array Ordering:**

- All dependencies in the `Dependencies` array must be listed in ascending order by their `Order` field values
- This ensures consistent processing and validation of rule dependencies

**Example Order Values:**

```json
{
  "CAU-SampleColumn-C-001-M": {
    "Order": 10,
    "ValidationCriteria": {
      "Dependencies": [
        "CAU-OtherRule-C-001-M",    // Order: 5
        "CAU-AnotherRule-C-002-M"   // Order: 15
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

**Best Practices:**

> - Use multiples of 10 (10, 20, 30...) to allow for future rule insertion

Reviewer 2: This looks like a new concept as well. In line 383, its mentioned to "use incremental values e.g." but sounds as if its possible to merely select incremental values. Here, in best practices, it mentions "use multiples of 10", which sounds more explicit. Similar wording should be used the same, or explicitly use multiples of 10 to avoid confusion. 

Havent' seen this at work, but would adding in a new rule "based on the example of Order: 5 and Order: 15, mean a future rule entry would follow "Order: 10"?

Author: Cleaned up the example and stated that Order is no longer optional.

- Maintain consistent ordering within related rule groups
- Document the rationale for specific ordering decisions in rule notes
- Validate dependency ordering using automated tests

## ModelRule Templates

### Base column composite rule

Base rule for a column which links all related Model Rules for the column.

```json
  "CAU-SampleColumn-C-000-M": {
    "Function": "Composite",
    "Reference": "SampleColumn",
    "EntityType": "Column",
    "DatasetId": "CostAndUsage",
    "DatasetName": "Cost and Usage",
    "Notes": "",
    "ModelVersionIntroduced": "1.2",
    "Status": "Active",
    "ApplicabilityCriteria": [],
    "Type": "Static",

>     "Order": 0,

Reviewer 2: The introduction of ordering mentions that its optional. If not used, is "Order: 0" the correct entry or is this similar to 0 indexing?

## Order Field Usage

The `Order` field is used to specify the sequence in which rules should be processed or displayed. This field provides explicit control over rule ordering within the requirements model.

### Purpose and Usage

The `Order` field serves several important functions:

1. **Rule Presentation Order**: Controls the sequence in which rules appear in generated documentation and summaries
2. **Logical Processing Sequence**: Ensures rules are evaluated in the correct order when dependencies exist
3. **Dependency Ordering**: Dependencies arrays must be ordered according to the `Order` field values of the referenced rules

### Order Field Guidelines

**Assignment Rules:**

- Use incremental values (e.g., 10, 20, 30) to allow for future insertions
- Lower values indicate higher priority/earlier processing
- Rules without an `Order` field are ignored for ordering purposes

> - The `Order` field is optional but recommended for rules that need explicit sequencing

Author: ```suggestion
- The `Order` field is required for rules to show explicit sequencing
```

**Dependency Array Ordering:**

- All dependencies in the `Dependencies` array must be listed in ascending order by their `Order` field values
- This ensures consistent processing and validation of rule dependencies

**Example Order Values:**

```json
{
  "CAU-SampleColumn-C-001-M": {
    "Order": 10,
    "ValidationCriteria": {
      "Dependencies": [
        "CAU-OtherRule-C-001-M",    // Order: 5

>         "CAU-AnotherRule-C-002-M"   // Order: 15

Author: ```suggestion
        "CAU-OtherRule-C-001-M",    // Order: 20
        "CAU-AnotherRule-C-002-M"   // Order: 30
```

### Format String Handling rule

```json
  "CAU-SampleColumn-C-007-M": {

>     "Function": "Type",

Reviewer: Should this be Format...?

```suggestion
    "Function": "Format",
```

    "DatasetId": "CostAndUsage",
    "DatasetName": "Cost and Usage",
    "Type": "Static",

>     "Order": 10,

Reviewer: The order on this line, and all subsequent lines in this example, should be incremented.  They're all currently 10.

Author: I went back and forth on this. I'll make them increment.

Author: ```suggestion
    "Order": 20,
```

    "DatasetId": "CostAndUsage",
    "DatasetName": "Cost and Usage",
    "Type": "Static",

>     "Order": 10,

Author: ```suggestion
    "Order": 30,
```

    "DatasetId": "CostAndUsage",
    "DatasetName": "Cost and Usage",
    "Type": "Static",

>     "Order": 10,

Author: ```suggestion
    "Order": 40,
```

    "DatasetId": "CostAndUsage",
    "DatasetName": "Cost and Usage",
    "Type": "Static",

>     "Order": 10,

Author: ```suggestion
    "Order": 50,
```

    "DatasetId": "CostAndUsage",
    "DatasetName": "Cost and Usage",
    "Type": "Static",

>     "Order": 10,

Author: ```suggestion
    "Order": 60,
```

    "DatasetId": "CostAndUsage",
    "DatasetName": "Cost and Usage",
    "Type": "Static",

>     "Order": 10,

Author: ```suggestion
    "Order": 70,
```

    }
  }
```

### Nullability requirement rule (conditional)

Common rule for columns with conditional nullability requirements. Use when a column MUST NOT be null under certain conditions or MAY be null under others.

```json
  "CAU-SampleColumn-C-008-C": {
    "Function": "Nullability",
    "Reference": "SampleColumn",
    "EntityType": "Column",
    "EntityId": "SampleColumn",
    "EntityName": "Sample Column",
    "Notes": "",
    "ModelVersionIntroduced": "1.2",
    "Status": "Active",
    "ApplicabilityCriteria": [],
    "DatasetType": "CAU",
    "DatasetId": "CostAndUsage",
    "DatasetName": "Cost and Usage",
    "Type": "Static",

>     "Order": 10,

Author: ```suggestion
    "Order": 80,
```
